Hello, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the Negotiations Ninja podcast. We exist to develop and deliver the most engaging negotiation content and training programs in the world, and we have fun doing it because no one likes boring content. On this podcast, we explore negotiation strategy, tactical negotiation warfare, stories of failure, and stories of success. We host negotiation experts, business people, and entrepreneurs from all walks of life and discuss what works, what doesn't work, and how we can get better, not only at negotiation, but also at business and at life. Thanks for joining us. We hope you have a great time. Hello Negotiations Ninja listeners. Thank you so much for joining me once again on the Negotiations Ninja podcast. Today we're going to be interviewing Rafael Lapin of Lapin Negotiation Services, which is a negotiation consultancy based out of Los Angeles. They specifically focus on dispute resolution, mediation, arbitration. He's also a senior consultant to the United Nations Institute for Training and Research and an adjunct professor of law at Whittier Law School. He's got a great amount of experience in conflict resolution, dispute resolution, and mediation and arbitration. I think what a lot of us forget about is the cost of conflict and the cost of not being able to manage conflict effectively. We get pretty deep into what does it take to manage conflict, how do we manage conflict, and what kind of mechanisms should we put in place so that we can manage conflict effectively in the future. I highly encourage you to take notes during this and reach out to me. If you have any feedback, you know how to get ahold of me on LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, whatever your social media channel of choice is. Give me a shout. I'd love to hear from you. Thanks again for listening and enjoy. Good morning Negotiation Junkies. Thank you so much for listening to us today. You've got Mark on the Negotiations Ninja podcast. Today we have actually a fellow expat, a fellow South African, born and raised in South Africa, Mr. Rafael Lapin, who owns Lapin Negotiation Services based out of LA, and adjunct professor of law at Whittier Law School. He started his own practice quite some time ago, has been running his own show for some time. How are you, Rafael? I'm well, thank you, Mark. I'm very happy to be on the show with you. Happy and actually privileged to appreciate this time with you and looking forward to some interesting discussion. Yeah. So am I. I think we're going to get into a really good discussion today. For the listeners, the focus of today's discussion is really around law more than anything else. What are some of the legal things that happen in negotiation, specifically when it comes to conflict and how to manage conflict in a negotiation or post negotiation? We're going to let the conversation take us where it needs to. It's going to be loose and conversational, as it always is, and I want to get you to know Rafael a little bit better. So Rafael, maybe we'll just start off with a bit of a personal history, your background, and why you started your practice. Great. Okay, Mark, as the youngest of four siblings, so I had to learn how to negotiate and manage conflict from a very, very young age, but as I grow older and I started studying law and getting involved in the real world out there, I became concerned about the legal system, particularly the way we see it played out in the United States, which is an incredibly religious society, and in fact, it reminds me, as in Copenhagen a few years ago, working with the European Union, and one of the European lawyers asked me, and they said, why is it when we're doing work with Americans, we're trying to make deals with Americans, they walk into the room with an army of lawyers and with reams of contracts, and they couldn't quite understand it. My response to them was, well, there's a bit of a difference here between Europeans and Americans. In America, we do business with people even though we don't trust them, so trust is not a prerequisite to necessarily do business, built very, very tightly, but we don't need trust in America because we work very, very closely with a very, very strong legal language in contracts and a very strong system to enforce it. In Europe, I said to them, you guys only do business or try to do business mostly with people you trust, and you'll try to build that trust beforehand. In America, because of that fact, I think it's a very religious society, and if there is a breach, it goes straight to litigation, which is not a great thing we'll discuss a little later. When I saw that, I realized that I wanted to be involved in helping people deal with disputes, helping people make negotiations, but in a much more optimal way in which we can resolve our disputes and make deals and negotiate in ways where we are not pitting the relationship against the substance. We can be respectful and fair in the relationship dealings, but still at the same time being very hard on the substantial issues of the negotiation or the dispute resolution. When I started this, this was an emerging field back in the 90s, mediation was just taking off and looking for alternative dispute resolution methods was taking off. It just seemed a perfect fit for me, and that's how originally I got involved. Awesome. Very, very cool. A lot of the time I get questions from listeners and from clients about what are the most common issues that you see, and while that's a great question, there's certainly a number of issues that I see on an ongoing basis, but I'd be interested to hear from you. In your practice, what are some of the most common negotiation questions that you get on an ongoing basis? Well, oftentimes people, some things that people sometimes say to me just happened in fact yesterday, I get so emotional in negotiations and I sometimes get angry and I sometimes get upset, and any time that a person feels his vital interests of being threatened, he's going to get emotional, and typically what happens over there is that if one party gets emotional, it triggers emotion, and the other party spirals down into an action, reaction, and counter-reaction sort of situation. So oftentimes, interestingly, I'll be asked, how can I make sure to go into that negotiation with grace and composure and not be triggered by these sort of hot buttons that may set me off and derail the entire negotiation? So sometimes that's an issue. Another issue question that I get involved in, how can I deal with people that are being unreasonable? A great one is, how can I make them hear me? How can I make them listen to me? Which is another great one, and of course the question is based on an entirely wrong premise, but those are the sort of questions that come up very often, very typically, other than we'll be involved in a specific negotiation and we're working on substantial details of the particular negotiation, and then obviously sort of questions come up related to that. But in terms of the process, it's usually sort of, how can I make sure they listen and why they're being so unreasonable, why aren't they agreeing with me, why they're being so unfair, that sort of thing. So how do you answer the question then of how can I make them hear me? Because I feel like a lot of the time, many people who enter a negotiation feel like their argument is based on very clear logic, and when they feel like someone isn't listening to them, that's obviously when they get very frustrated. So how do you answer the question of how can I make them hear me? So that's a great question, and again, as I sort of alluded to, the answer is a bit counterintuitive. So first of all, the studies have shown that in normal conversation, typically about 70% on average of what the talker is saying, the listener is missing, and the reason the listener is missing that is because he's busy framing his response while the talker is talking. So I've got to make sure when I'm talking to somebody that I'm liberating them from trying to think about their response or what they're going to say while I'm talking, because if that's going to happen, it's a waste of time for me to talk. So for that to happen, I've got to first make sure before I even begin talking, if I want to really be listened, I've got to first start off the conversation on their side and say, Mark, tell me what your initial thoughts on this issue is, and make sure that you feel adequately heard, adequately understood, and I'm using active listening to make sure that you really know that I've got you. And then once I say having understood you, it would make sense for me to share some of my ideas with you. Now you liberate it to listen to me. But until that time, you're too busy thinking about what you're going to say. So paradoxically, the way to make sure that I'm being heard and I'm being understood is to first make sure that the other party feels heard and understood as well. Many people are afraid to do that because they think that understanding, demonstrating, understanding is tantamount to agreeing. And that's not true. I can understand you immaculately. It doesn't mean I agree to you. And in negotiations, I'll say to the other party very often, I'll say, you know, before I'm suspending judgment, I've not yet made a decision. But before I can make an informed decision, I need to understand more about what your position is. Please go ahead and try to explain that to me. And I'll spend quite a lot of time on their side while they're doing it. And another reason that that's important is because if I say something after I've demonstrated a very, very robust understanding of what it is that you're saying, you're much more receptive to what I'm saying because you know that I've understood you. So my mentor, Roger Fisher in Harvard used to argue cases in the Supreme Court. And interestingly, when he would argue those cases, Mark, he would start off arguing those cases, making the argument of his opposing counsel. The only thing is he would argue it more compellingly and more eloquently than his opponents argued it until the judge would get confused. And the judge would say, Mr. Fisher, whose side are you on? And Roger would say, bear with me on, I'm getting there. And having often demonstrated incredible understanding of the other side, he would then say, and your honor is a different way of looking at this as well. And then present his story. Notice though, he didn't say, but he said, and because that is the great eraser that erases everything that came before it. You're wonderful. You're brilliant. You're gorgeous. So there are many, many advantages to make sure that I'm first spending a lot of time on your side, understanding you, demonstrating that understanding, that I can argue your case better than you can argue it yourself. And then you're much more receptive to listen to me. And that's a real way to get hurt. I love what you said there in terms of liberating them to listen to you. I think that's a great way to think of it because essentially they're a prisoner to their own thoughts until you do that. That's right. And people come into negotiations ready to assert their demands. And that's one of the big mistakes that people do. They come in and they say, we demand this, we want that, this is what we want. And very few people respond positively to that sort of thing. And that's why many negotiations go south. Yeah, really good advice. And is that the source of conflict? When someone feels like they haven't been listened to or understood, is that ultimately the source of conflict? Or what's generally the source of conflict in a negotiation? Mark, that's a very broad question because there's so many sources of conflict. I'll give you an example from this week, actually. So we did a mediation this week. It was quite a complex real estate dispute. There were seven, besides me, there were seven parties in the room. And we actually, in five and a half hours, we actually reached agreements. It was wonderful. Nobody could believe it. We reached a very good agreement. Then yesterday, the attorneys of one of the parties called me and they said that the records that they received that showed certain numbers related to the real estate were not accurate. And this attorney was ready to go for the jugular. Our client's pulling out of the deal, he wants this, he wants that, he wants the other, he wants to cut the price by 25% or whatever it was. So the attorneys said, should I contact them? I said, don't you dare. Because they would have got in, again, with an emotional thing, you cooked us, you cheated us, and that would have just unraveled the entire agreement. I said, let me deal with this. I'll talk to the other side. Well, it turns out, Mark, that the records that they provided were actually the wrong records. The most recently updated records. And once we found the correct records, everything was there as it should have been. So there's an example of a potential cause of conflict, which is just a basic misunderstanding. So before we go down that path, we need to make sure that we have the facts that we need, and we have the documentation that we need, and it's all accurate. But people jump to conclusions and assumptions, and then they act on those assumptions. The more simplistic example of that is where people confuse impact with intent. So because you did something which impacted me in a hurtful way, I automatically assumed that was your intent. So there are many different causes that could trigger conflict. And if you know how to deal and manage with conflict, the root cause of what's causing the conflict, what triggered that conflict, is less important than the process that could be used to resolve that conflict. So yesterday, for example, I didn't argue the process that I used was, instead of going to attack the other side, I called the other attorney up, and I said, I'm sure there's a misunderstanding here. This is what the other side's claiming. Is there anything we need to clarify? So I did not pass on the entire message that I got from the first attorney, I just used a very, very decontaminated, detoxified message. And I said, I'm sure there's a misunderstanding here. What can we do? I think they must have sent the wrong record. And that took care of the whole problem. So in terms of how we approach it is more important than what the actual cause of it is. Yeah. You know, you speak very deeply about the cost of conflict and what the cost of conflict could be in a contract disagreement, especially when it comes to ambiguous terms and conditions. So for example, if you've already executed on an agreement, and generally in my experience, there's always something that may be ambiguous in an agreement after the fact, and let's just say, for example, parties change, and it's no longer the same party that's managing the agreement that executed it, so the intention isn't fully understood. What is the cost of conflict in a contract disagreement after a contract's already been executed? When something goes wrong, and you see somebody, there's a perceived breach of contract, shall we say. Again, people jump to a conclusion and immediately suspect that that guy's a cheat. He's not honest with me, I can't trust him, and immediately jump to that conclusion. And that becomes an emotional reaction, which typically triggers a call to your lawyer, or to your in-house counsel, and say, you've got to file a lawsuit. And once you file a lawsuit, again, you're going down that path where there's going to be an action and reaction, because you file a lawsuit, the other side becomes highly defensive. And before you know it, you're already in a protracted legal battle. And I don't have to tell you all the audience of how costly a legal battle is. And it's not only in terms of financial cost, economic cost, it's cost in derailing productivity, it's a cost in psychological cost, it's a cost in time. We're going through depositions and having to find all the necessary documents that one needs to support, evidence and so on. And fighting a legal battle typically takes a couple of years, until it actually goes through trial. And at the end, as you know, 90% don't even settle in trial. I'm sorry, most of them don't go to trial, most of them settle on the court house steps. So we don't try to sort of sit down and negotiate our differences, we go straight to battle. Even if that was a case in international diplomacy, where diplomacy didn't work, and any time there was a slight misunderstanding between countries, they would immediately go to war. So that's basically the social equivalent of how people go to straight litigation without using any diplomatic efforts. And the costs of those are absolutely enormous in so many different ways. And that's one of the reasons that I find passion in my work, because we're able to save people so much, in terms of resolution, that not only keeps them out of court, but very, very often actually keeps the working relationship. So we've done resolutions, mediations and negotiations, where there's a bit of dispute, but at the end of the day, the parties continue doing business together. Good advice. And so is there something that people can do to, because it seems to be a very reactionary response when we get into that state, that emotional state when it comes to, you've breached and now I'm really upset, so we're going straight to litigation. Is there something that people can do to think about or habits to develop in order to avoid getting into that emotional state or that mental state of reactionary approach? Yes. We always tell our clients that we're working with is that in negotiations, it's much more important to keep the other party off the defensive, not to make them defensive. We can accomplish a lot more when they are being defensive. And I think that's got to be the initial point when we are approaching the other side of who we maybe suspect breached a contract, is not to call them up or send a lawsuit and say, okay, you guys breached the contract, we can no longer trust you. But to approach it from a more diplomatic side, and again, I'm sure there's been some sort of misunderstanding here, we've noticed that we've noticed that. What ideas do you have in terms of how we might deal with this? And I find many, many times when we approach it in that way, it opens up some productive discussion, some productive conversation. People at the core, for the most part, Mark, are reasonable, rational people. But they do become raving lunatics when the vital, as I mentioned earlier, the vital interests of being threatened, of where they're being accused, where they don't feel that accusations are appropriate or accurate, and that's when people sort of become defensive and that's when they become lunatics. But people at the core are rational, logical people with whom one can reason. I don't know if you're aware of my book, Working with Difficult People, but in the book I make the point that when I'm dealing with a difficult person, my first question that I ask myself is what am I doing that's enabling them and allowing them to be difficult, and what new ingredient can I mix into this interpersonal dynamic with them that could change that? Because they're difficult from my perspective. If you ask their friends or you ask their spouse, you ask their family, is this a difficult person? Is it a pathologically difficult person? I say, I don't know what you're talking about. There's difficulty in this situation and I can control that. Interesting. What do you think that people can do, given that there's conflict, ultimately there's always going to be, it doesn't have to be always, but there's often conflict in contract negotiations or breach of contract discussions. What can people do to avoid conflict in those discussions? We speak about the whole dispute resolution process. Could we be including that dispute resolution process and that language in our agreement so that if we get to a point of conflict, we have a process to follow that is able to force people out of that emotional state into a process that they can follow to help them through that dispute resolution? You know, Mark, I'm a very, very big advocate of ADR clauses in contracts. The reason is it's much easier for us to talk about a potential conflict and how we are going to deal with it before we become embroiled in it. Once you're embroiled in the conflict, you know, that's when people don't see things quite as rationally necessarily, particularly if it's sort of attack and counter-attack. So it's certainly much more productive and easier to talk about what will we do in a situation of conflict before that conflict actually arises, and then to make sure that there's processes that are set into place. And in many different ways that these alternative dispute resolution or ADR clauses can be structured and tailored to the particular situation. And you know, we've done some useful ones ourselves and actually seen them be implemented in some dispute later on that arise. And the idea of an ADR clause is essentially to retard the litigation process or to eliminate it completely through arbitration, which one has to be careful about because as you probably know, arbitration, at least in the U.S., can't be appealed on very, very limited basis as can be appealed. But nevertheless, you know, many ADR clauses will stipulate arbitration. So if we have a method built into our contract that we both agree essentially that if we do reach a point where there's a dispute over something, we will make sure we will resolve it and use litigation as a very, very last resort. I mean, that can save, just that clause in the contract can save those companies a lot of money. And if ultimately there is some dispute over a contract, which does happen many times, as you know. Yeah, I find the importance of having a dispute resolution clause in agreement cannot be understated. I feel like, you know, there's been enough situations that I've been in where we fully realize that it's significantly less costly to come to some sort of a business solution as opposed to some sort of a legal solution. And it's certainly going to be better on the relationship, I find, if we have those clauses in place. That's right. You mentioned this difference between the legal side with the solution side. It's actually interesting because I did a mediation not long ago, where it's a fascinating mediation as well. So, you know, that's what I enjoy about mediation because it's, you know, when you work the process, it just works like magic. It's amazing. This is also a major dispute, a major business dispute. And the lawyers came in with the clients and the lawyers started arguing the law. And you know, I let that happen because my thinking was that there had to be some doubt and dissonance sort of brought into that room with each attorney realizing there's another argument here. And how might the judge look at that? Because until that happens, each attorney thinks that he has a watertight case. And it's only when the attorneys and the clients hear the other side's case, they start asking them now, then I might say something to one of the attorneys and say, let's imagine that it's six months down the road, a year down the road, two years down the road, and you've lost this case. What possible reason would you be able to think of as to why you might lose? And that oftentimes generates some interesting discussion, throw some doubt and dissonance in there. But my point is, as long as this discussion was happening, it happened for about an hour and a half in this particular mediation, the mediation was not going nowhere. And we could have gone like that for three days and no resolution would have ever happened. But I had to allow that to happen, as I say, just to allow some doubt and dissonance to be introduced into that room. And then what I did was I shifted it away completely from the legal side and started going and trying to understand what the needs of the parties were, what were the concerns of the parties. And some fascinating information came out that was a revelation to me, which is what typically unlocks the negotiation when you find those little nuggets of revelations. And then at that point, we were able to resolve it. So arguing the legal strengths and weaknesses of the case typically doesn't resolve an issue in negotiation or in mediation. Yeah, I fully agree with you. I think, you know, the more we can try and maintain that sort of rational outlook instead of responding with the immediate legal response, it's only going to benefit us in the future. That's right. And the legal response will stifle and inhibit any creative thinking. So you've got to move out of that legal argument arena to start looking for the creativity, the creativity in the negotiation and in the resolution. You know, I'd love to tell the story, which I'm sure you might have heard about the sheik, the Arab sheik who had 17 camels. Did you ever hear that story? No, I hadn't. Yeah, so he writes in his will an interesting sort of division and you know, in some of those cultures, the oldest son obviously has certain rights over the other sons and so on. There's a certain hierarchy over there. So he leaves the oldest son, he decides to leave the oldest son one half of his camels. He wants to leave his second son a third of his camels and he wants to leave his youngest son one ninth of his camels. And of course, the problem is 17 isn't divisible by 9, 3 or 2. So they go to a mediator to resolve this issue and the mediator immediately sees the problem. How are we going to divide 17 camels by half a third and a ninth? Mediator asks them if they happen to have a neighbor who might have a camel. And they said, yes, we do. And the mediator says, we'll go borrow a camel from him. We'll make sure to get it back to him before nightfall this evening and bring it here. So the brothers go off and they go to the neighbor and they borrow this camel and they bring the camel back to where the mediator is. And now they've got the 17 plus the borrowed ones. So now there's altogether 18 camels sitting there. So the mediator says, well, let's start dividing and it gives the half of the camels to the oldest son. Well, half of 18 is 9. And he says, okay, we've got to give a third of the camels to the second son. A third of 18 is 6. So 9 and 6 is 15. And then he says, well, now we have to give a ninth of the camels to the youngest son. One ninth of 18 is 2. So if you add that up, you've got 9 plus 6 is 15, plus 2 is 17. And now they have the one camel, 18th camel, left over that they can return to its original owner. And they've resolved the problem. And they've resolved it very creatively. And in negotiations and mediations, what I always like to speak about and look for is that proverbial 18th camel, that little creative idea or that bit of information or whatever it happens to be that just unlocks the negotiation and allows us to move forward. And we see this negotiation time and time again, I was recently in a mediation where again, the dispute seemed to everybody to be intractable. Nobody thought this would settle. And I heard one thing, it was a small sentence embedded in a whole diatribe of information. And I was listening very carefully and I took that one sentence and took it out and captured it, fed it back to them and started digging into that issue. And that opened up and unlocked the entire negotiation, which led to resolution. So we always want to make sure to be looking for that 18th camel in negotiation. So being involved in legal posturing and legal arguments, that inhibits us and that prevents us from seeing that 18th camel. Great story. I think there's a lot to be learned from listening. I mean, the piece of advice that I get and that the listeners get over and over and over again on this show, it seems to keep popping up, is listen, like actively listen, shut your mouth, don't do anything else. Just listen to what the other party is saying. And in that process, you'll be able to uncover a significant amount more information than if you're thinking about your response to what the person is saying. Or we're asserting your position. Yes, or we're asserting your position. So actually listen to what the other party is saying. And if that means that you stop what you're doing and write down what the other party is saying so that you can actively listen and lean in, then you're going to get a much, much better response. And not only that, actually, Mark, it goes even beyond that. And that is that paradoxically, you are far more in control of any conversation, far more in control when you're listening and asking clarifying questions, as opposed to when you're trying to speak and assert your position and demands, you're so much more in control of that conversation, because you can funnel that conversation. And when you speak about listening, obviously, active listening is a very, very important component of that. And an advanced active listening goes beyond just summarizing and paraphrasing that, but it goes to reframing. So if somebody says, for example, to me, well, we just don't trust your ability to deliver, okay, that in itself is a threatening and contaminated statement because nobody likes to be accused of not being trustworthy. Right. But if you know how to listen, you're able to use your active listening to reframe. And I would say, Mark, so let me understand clearly here, if I understand you correctly, you see some value in this proposal, but you have a concern as to how we might fulfill and deliver. Is that accurate? So I've used my active listening now to reframe your contaminated term of we don't trust you to a much more problem solving oriented word of you have a concern. So when you're using your active listening and clarifying questions, you are able to direct and funnel that conversation and control that conversation as to where it's going. Yeah, we, you know, we don't give enough credence to listening. I think we don't give enough importance to the power of listening and asking good questions. It certainly seems to be the basis of, of significant negotiation. It does. And the other thing that I've done, I've listened to so many things, like a multipurpose tool. The other thing that it does, Mark, is that I can't begin to resolve an issue with you unless you know that I'm taking you seriously. If you don't feel I'm taking you seriously or the issue seriously, you're not going to engage with me in problem solving. So when I'm listening to you and I'm actively listening to you and I'm demonstrating to you that I'm understanding you, that tells you and that demonstrates you that I'm really taking you seriously. Right. I totally agree with you. Raphael, if you were going to give advice to the listeners, maybe top three things on negotiation that you think that people need to think about when it comes to negotiation, what would you tell them? First, preparation, Mark, many of us don't, many of us don't prepare for a negotiation, not because we don't understand its importance, but rather because we don't have a process or a methodology of how to prepare, and you can't prepare a script because you don't know where that script's going to go. You might prepare a script to blow the socks off and they walk in wearing sandals without socks and then what do you do? So you can't prepare a script. So most people don't have a methodology how to prepare. The other thing that I think people neglect to do, which is very, very important is they are way too focused on their own needs and positions. And in preparation, what we always work with our clients is when we working in preparing for a complex, difficult negotiation, we spend a lot of time on trying to understand what are the interests of the other side, what are the needs and concerns of the other side. If they don't reach agreement, what is the best alternative they could possibly do, and how could we make that alternative less attractive and appealing to them? So we've got to spend a lot of time preparation is typically we'll do in preparation 25% on our side and 75% trying to anticipate and understand what are the other side's needs, what are the concerns, what are the perceptions that when we come into a negotiation, we try to come in understanding their mindset, because we want to change somebody's mind, we've got to understand where the mind is at. And we sometimes done some very, very interesting exercises in preparation with executives, where we do what's called the role reversal exercise. And so I make them sit in the chair and I say, okay, you're not going to be you, you're not the CEO of this company, you're going to be the party who you are negotiating with, I'm going to be you. And I make him on the side of the I'm going to be you. And I make him argue the other party's case. And suddenly a light bulb goes on and he said, you know, I'm now understanding why they're not agreeing to us. It doesn't make sense. It's crazy. So I say now we have to recraft the proposal in a way that doesn't seem crazy. So preparation is really, really important. The second thing that I think you mentioned is the listening. And you know, that we spoke about and we both agree that how vital and crucial that is in a negotiation. And the other thing is interesting, Mark, and that is the concept of being disagreeing and being disagreeable are not the same thing. I can disagree with you, I can have an argument with you, but I can still not be disagreeable. And I think being in a negotiation and putting the other side at ease and making the other side feel respected, feel feeling as being fairly treated, feeling that is an active participant and a partner in crafting a solution over here. I think all those things are very, very important because that sets the stage for a productive collaborative engagement in negotiations, many people come into a negotiation, having the answer already decided, $500,000, that's all I'll take. That isn't what negotiation is. Negotiation is understanding what interests need to be met. And then going to the negotiation and saying these are our interests and these are your interests, now we have to go together to come up with ideas that could meet both our interests. And that could go anywhere. We don't yet know what those might look like. But many people come into a negotiation purely from their standpoint and their perception space. And with the answers already decided, and they see a negotiation is as how can I beat them into submission? Good advice. Really good advice. Rafael, if you've if you've listened to the show, you know that we learn a lot about the experience of others, mainly from what they've told us, but also from a story of failure that they're willing to share. So I'm hoping if you're comfortable to if you could share a story of failure that you've had in a negotiation, what was the failure? What did you learn from it? And what would you do differently today? That's a good question, Mark. I mean, obviously, my first response is to say, well, we've never had failures. But you know, I've lately been working, you know, ever since Brené Brown's come out with her vulnerability, Ted talks, that have made a huge impact, I think, on the world at large, I've been working on my vulnerabilities, of course, have let me acknowledge that of course, I've had failures. One failure that I'm sort of thinking about is it was also mediation that we did. But we didn't, in the mediation, we didn't, you know, I never leave a mediation until we've got a signed agreement, you know, if there is an agreement. But we left loose ends on that one. We didn't tighten it up sufficiently in actual negotiation. And after that, one of the parties started reneging and pulling back and changing terms, and that sort of thing. And what I learned from that from that was a couple of things. First of all, not to rush people into agreement or commitment. And, you know, when you've been in a mediation for eight hours, you're kind of at the point that you want to sort of get there already. But ever since that's happened, I at the end, when we reached agreement, I make quite sure that every clause that's written out in whatever they've agreed to is read out aloud to all the parties. And that everybody agrees 100% on that. And that to make to make sure that there's full total commitment and agreement in that negotiation, when we try to rush commitment, we try to rush agreement. And those are times when things start falling apart. So I think, you know, in failure, that that was one case of failure, where I may have sort of rushed to agreement a little bit too quickly. And that caused the agreement to unravel later on. And as a result of that, I'm now very, very careful not to rush to agreements to retard that's that that process and allow it to happen at its own pace. That when we finally do sign an agreement, that's an agreement with it with which everybody feels very comfortable with, and everybody feels they've been an equal and active participant in in designing and crafting. So certainly, that's, you know, that's something that I've learned from a failure. The other the other aspect is when things do get emotional. You know, if you don't manage those emotions, well, you can't neglect them, you can't ignore them, emotions in that room need to be managed, they need to be dealt with. And the worst thing you could say to somebody, they're getting emotional is calm down. You know, that'll just drive them completely crazy. And so emotions are happening again, knowing how to deal with those emotions are really, really important, because otherwise, one part is going to walk out of that room. And once they do walk out of the room, it's not that you can't bring it back, but it becomes more complicated, becomes more difficult, and it creates all sorts of different layout complexity. So certainly, we've had negotiations, derail when emotions have not been appropriately managed. So now if people do get emotional, I allow them to vent again, I listen actively. I use active listening to reframe. So if somebody sort of says to says to me as an example, well, we've heard that you generate unanticipated costs, and yet you never finish projects on time, okay, that sort of thing. So I'll use active listening to reframe that I'll never use active listening to reinforce the negative. And say, for example, Oh, so you feel that we are costs are unjustified, I'll never use that. I'll, I'll, I'll reframe that in terms of future need, and say something like, if I understand you correctly, what's important to you is a relationship in which costs always anticipated and transparent, image projects on it finished on time, that's the kind of relationship you'll be looking for, right. So I've reframed from past accusations to future needs, and dealing with those sort of attacks in that sort of way. So I've learned to do that very, very effectively and efficiently. Whereas, you know, in past times that might have, you know, I might have got a little defensive than that, and you know, in that sort of situation. So typically those I think is what comes to mind in terms of the kinds of failures that I've experienced. That's a great negative information in terms of reframing the negative into future needs. Yeah, never, never reinforce the negative. Somebody says, Rafael, I think you're a fool. I'm not gonna say, oh, so you think I'm stupid, right? I might say something, you know, it sounds to me like you feel I fell a little short of the mark, and I'd like to know more about that. But never reinforce the negative. Awesome. Great advice. Rafael, I, you know, I've really enjoyed having you here today. And I'd love to have you come on again, actually. And it seems as though you have a very unique understanding between the differences between maybe European cultures and North American culture, specifically the US and Canada and how they negotiate. And I think it would be really interesting for the listeners to get a good understanding of how differently those cultures negotiate, what's similar, what's different? And how can we learn more from the other party, so to speak, in terms of how to better understand them, how to negotiate better with them? I think that would be a really interesting show. Would you be open to that? Yes, of course. And there are so many differences that that Americans are not the subtleties of which many Americans are not sort of very familiar. And Mark, you know, my background in negotiation is Harvard. And I think what Harvard has done brilliantly, I think what they've really done brilliantly is they have developed a process in negotiation that transcends for the most part, now there are the cultural differences, but for the most part transcends cultural and personal differences and goes down to the very core of human commonality. Because as humans, we all share certain things in common. We all want to be treated fairly. We all want to be treated with respect. We all want to preserve our dignity. We all want to look good to our bosses. There's certain things that go down to the very core of human commonality. So there's many things in the process of negotiation, this particular process goes down to that core. But yet there are also differences which we sort of touched on. Awesome. Well, again, thank you so much for joining me. If people want to find out more about you and what you're up to, how do they do that? So, you know, my website is www.lappannegotiation services.com. That's my last name, L-A-P-I-N. And then a second N for negotiation, Lappannegotiation services.com. And I'll tell you something else, Mark, we've got, we sent out a monthly newsletter. So that's not a newsletter, it's a monthly column that will deal with different aspects of negotiation. And we've got a whole archive there on our monthly column page and also on our blog page. It deals with things like Brexit, it deals with things like NAFTA, uses those negotiations to extract lessons from deals with all sorts of other things. The most recent column that went up there was, it's called a negotiating without trust. Can we negotiate without trust? So there's some fascinating articles there that everybody can access. There's no membership or password to look at. So please feel free to browse around our blog and around our archive of monthly columns on the website, which is lappannegotiationservices.com. Wonderful. Fantastic. Well, Raphael, thank you so much for joining me once again. I look forward to doing this in the future. Mark, it's been a pleasure. It's been an absolute pleasure. And in Afrikaans, as we say, taught since. Yes. And for the listeners who don't understand Afrikaans, you can call me later. And we'll have a conversation about that. Thanks so much again, Raphael. Have a wonderful day. Ladies and gents, if you're interested in some of the cool things we discussed today or the resources or books we mentioned, take a look at the show notes. If you're interested in negotiation and you want to find out more about what we do, you can find us at negotiations.ninja. That's the negotiations with an s.ninja.com. Thanks so much for joining me. And if you enjoyed the show, please share it through your favorite online social media channel, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, whatever you most enjoy. Thanks again, and we'll see you next time.
